NEUROSCIENCE
RESEARCH ARTICLES
E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

Mechanisms of Neurofeedback: A Computation-theoretic Approach
Eddy J. Davelaar
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, Malet Street, WC1E 7HX London, United Kingdom

Abstract—Neurofeedback training is a form of brain training in which information about a neural measure is fed
back to the trainee who is instructed to increase or decrease the value of that particular measure. This paper
focuses on electroencephalography (EEG) neurofeedback in which the neural measures of interest are the brain
oscillations. To date, the neural mechanisms that underlie successful neurofeedback training are still unexplained. Such an understanding would benefit researchers, funding agencies, clinicians, regulatory bodies,
and insurance firms. Based on recent empirical work, an emerging theory couched firmly within computational
neuroscience is proposed that advocates a critical role of the striatum in modulating EEG frequencies. The theory
is implemented as a computer simulation of peak alpha upregulation, but in principle any frequency band at one
or more electrode sites could be addressed. The simulation successfully learns to increase its peak alpha frequency and demonstrates the influence of threshold setting – the threshold that determines whether positive
or negative feedback is provided. Analyses of the model suggest that neurofeedback can be likened to a search
process that uses importance sampling to estimate the posterior probability distribution over striatal representational space, with each representation being associated with a distribution of values of the target EEG band. The
model provides an important proof of concept to address pertinent methodological questions about how to
understand and improve EEG neurofeedback success.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Neurofeedback. Ó 2017 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Key words: neurofeedback, electroencephalography, computational neuroscience, computer model.

This paper focuses on EEG neurofeedback. The aim
here is to provide a proof of concept that using
computational methods from neuroscience can pave the
way for understanding how neurofeedback works. In
several papers and books authored by leading
practitioners and researchers, a common call is
expressed to develop a theoretical understanding of
neurofeedback (e.g., Evans and Abarbanel, 1999;
Budzynski et al., 2009). Although the neural circuitry
involved in some brain rhythms are understood at a
descriptive level, how these rhythms are inﬂuenced
through feedback-based learning at a mechanistic level
is still unclear.
Why would we need to seek to understand
neurofeedback? Knowledge of the mechanisms
underlying neurofeedback at the neural level provides a
critical foundation for (1) interpreting ﬁndings (from the
lab and clinic), (2) guiding research eﬀorts, (3)
developing new protocols, (4) improving existing
protocols, (5) quality assurance, (6) risk assessment
and management, and (7) approval of protocols.
Currently, the research on neurofeedback is making
great steps in validating the eﬃcacy of neurofeedback
training (see for recent special issues Gruzelier et al.,
2014a,b; van Boxtel and Gruzelier, 2014). However, there
is no validated standardized methodology or a standard

INTRODUCTION
There are an increasing number of media reports about
controlling electronic devices through brainwaves,
whether it is for therapeutic reasons or for pure
entertainment. These brain-computer interfaces utilize
the ability of people to learn to voluntarily change their
brain rhythms when provided with corrective feedback.
This process is called neurofeedback and understanding
how it works is the topic of this paper. Neurofeedback is
a goal-directed process of modulating one’s own neural
dynamics by means of feedback-induced learning. The
feedback that is obtained can either be internal
phenomenological experiences or external provided
stimulation of which visual and auditory stimulations are
the most common modalities. The neural dynamics that
are being inﬂuenced can be measured through
electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography (MEG), blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD)
responses or any other direct or indirect methods.

Abbreviations: ALIC, anterior limb of the internal capsule; BOLD,
blood-oxygen-level-dependent; EEG, electroencephalography; MEG,
magnetoencephalography; MSN, medium spiny neuron; PAF, peak
alpha frequency; rt, real-time; SCP, slow cortical potential; UAF, upper
alpha frequency.
E-mail address: e.davelaar@bbk.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.05.052
0306-4522/Ó 2017 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
175

176

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

way of reporting the methods that have been used, leading to high study-exclusion rates in systematic reviews or
meta-analyses (e.g., Emmert et al., 2016). To circumvent
this, computational methods can be used to test whether
certain choices, such as threshold settings, integrating
neural activity across electrodes, the time window over
which the neural signal is calculated, and the maximum
feedback rate, have an eﬀect of neurofeedback success
and if so what the optimal parameters are. Given that
properly conducted experimental studies are costly in
terms of investment of money, time, and labor, drytesting a protocol using a computational model can make
the research eﬀorts more eﬃcient. At present, such an
opportunity does not exist.
To facilitate the process, this paper puts forward an
initial step toward a computational theory that explicates
the neural mechanisms underlying neurofeedback
training. By way of illustration, a computational model
using spiking neurons is implemented that shows
successful neurofeedback training and allows an
analysis of the learning process. To demonstrate its
beneﬁt, the inﬂuence of threshold setting on learning is
addressed in a mathematical abstraction of the model.
Future work will address how each of the
aforementioned points can be supported by using a
computational modelling approach.
There are many detailed descriptions of the
neuroanatomical circuitry involved in the generation of
brain frequencies (e.g., SCP: Birbaumer et al., 1990;
SMR: Sterman, 1996; Hughes and Crunelli, 2005; Ritter
et al., 2009; theta: Gruzelier, 2009; Hsieh and
Ranganath, 2014), but only some reports provide suggestions of what neurofeedback might be doing to this circuitry at the neurophysiological level (e.g., Sterman,
1996; Koralek et al., 2012). Here, a general theory of neurofeedback learning is proposed that is articulated at the
neurophysiological level and addresses the contributions
of the striatum and the thalamus. The theory is assumed
to be applicable to any neurofeedback modality (EEG,
MEG, BOLD) and breaks neurofeedback learning down
into three stages, of which the ﬁrst stage is then implemented in a computer simulation model. In order to
address how the ﬁrst stage unfolds a second simulation
model is analyzed in which the threshold setting for positive feedback is systematically varied. The results support
the view that during stage 1, the striatum performs a
search through representational space using importance
sampling, i.e., maintaining only those sampled representations that lead to reward.

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE STRIATUM
Several studies employing a variety of methodologies
conﬁrm the critical contribution of the striatum in
neurofeedback learning. Neuroimaging studies have
shown the involvement of the entire striatum in
neurofeedback (ventral striatum: Johnston et al., 2010;
putamen: Hinterberger et al., 2005; caudate: Levesque
et al., 2006). Johnston et al. (2010) trained participants
using a real-time (rt) fMRI-neurofeedback to increase
the activation in the emotion network, as deﬁned by the

collection of brain regions that was maximally responsive
to negative versus neutral stimuli. One of the non-target
areas that was activated during the learning process
was the ventral striatum. Hinterberger et al. (2005)
demonstrated the involvement of the putamen and thalamus in regulating the slow cortical potential (SCP) over
Cz. Levesque et al. (2006) observed increased functional
activation of the caudate in ADHD children after a theta/
SMR/beta1 protocol (20 sessions SMR increase with
theta decrease followed by 20 sessions beta1 increase
with theta decrease) over Cz. Furthermore, in a structural
MRI study, Ghaziri et al. (2013) found increased white
matter density in the anterior limb of the internal capsule
(ALIC) after increasing beta1 at F4 and P4 with EEG neurofeedback. Increases in fractional anisotropy in the left
ALIC, which includes cortico-striatal as well as frontal
cortico-thalamic ﬁbers, was correlated with enhanced
visual attention. Finally, in a critical experiment involving
rats, Koralek et al. (2012) measured the activity of motor
neurons and transformed this activity into an auditory signal. They showed that rats lacking cortico-striatal plasticity could not learn to control the auditory pitch. In a series
of experiments they also demonstrated that corticostriatal plasticity is necessary for neuroprosthetic control
to occur. These studies provide strong support for the
view that the entire striatum is involved in neurofeedback
learning with lasting functional and structural consequences. Whether there is speciﬁcity in the recruitment
of striatal subregions in relation to the EEG frequency,
learning direction, and electrode site is yet unclear.
This is not to say that it is impossible for EEG
spectrum modiﬁcation to occur through synaptic
changes at cortical sites only in the absence of a striatal
contribution, but the current literature provides
compelling evidence for a striatal theory of
neurofeedback learning. In a recent meta-analysis of 12
rt-fMRI studies, Emmert et al. (2016) observed that the
striatum and the anterior insula were non-target regions
that were consistently activated during the neurofeedback
learning. They suggested the existence of a ‘‘regulating
network” of which the striatum and the anterior insula contribute through their involvement in reward-based learning
and self-awareness processes, respectively. These ﬁndings are critical building blocks of the proposed theory to
which we turn next.

A MULTI-STAGE THEORY OF
NEUROFEEDBACK LEARNING
What happens in the brain of a person from the ﬁrst
training session to demonstrable voluntary control over
EEG brainwaves? In the theory advanced here three
stages are discerned (see Fig. 1). In the ﬁrst stage
(indicated by the red parts in Fig. 1), trainees may try
diﬀerent things, such as the strategies provided by the
trainer, strategies read from the internet, or idiosyncratic
strategies that come to mind during the training session.
Examples of strategies are trying to relax, focus on
breathing, counting numbers, thinking back of positive
events, trying to become angry or positive, staring at a
point on the computer screen, and many more. This

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

177

synthesis or up-regulating GABA
receptors. Other protocols might
lead to changes within diﬀerent thalamic pathways. It is assumed here
that the precise striatal-thalamic
and thalamo-cortical pathways that
undergo synaptic modiﬁcation will
govern the topographical and frequency speciﬁcity of the learning.
Simultaneously, the subjective
experience associated with the
particular brain state can become
more salient to the trainee and
Fig. 1. Overview of the theory. There are three stages. In stage 1, the striatal-exploration stage,
available for introspection. For
the frontal or executive system generates representations that create an activation pattern in the
example, the trainee might be able
striatum. These frontal representations are goals that activate associated response plans. The
striatal representation or response plan will modulate the activation of the thalamus and thereby
to say whether ‘‘being in the zone”
the EEG signal recorded in the cortex (three smaller blue squares). Stage 1 involves modifying the
means feeling relaxed or tensed or
synaptic connections between the frontal and striatal representations, using reward as the primary
even feeling disconnected from the
reinforcer. In stage 2, the thalamic-consolidation stage, a relatively stable frontal representation is
body. Phenomenological analyses
present and the synaptic modiﬁcations occur between the striatum and the thalamic nucleii.
have
shown
that
diﬀerent
Modiﬁcations in stage 2 may lead to further stage 1 learning. In the ﬁnal stage 3, the interoceptichomeostasis stage, which is not obligatory, a distinctive internal representation of the conseneurofeedback
protocols
are
quences of the target brain state becomes associated with the reward and in turn a secondary
associated with diﬀerent subjective
reinforcer.
experiences (Edge and Lancaster,
2004) and that diﬀerences in learning success may in part be due to
stage is the problem solving or exploration stage and
diﬀerences in subjective experiences (Davelaar et al.,
involves performing various mental acts and evaluating
2016). This subjective feeling is a higher level interoceptheir consequences on the feedback signal. It is
tive representation that consists of an integrated percept
expected that frontal brain areas are critically involved in
of the state of the body (see Ceunen et al., 2016) and that
this stage, as it requires retrieval, creation, and
is of importance in the ﬁnal stage. Based on the metamaintenance of goal representations (i.e., possible
analysis by Emmert et al. (2016), the anterior insula might
strategies), execution of these strategies as response
be crucial in the genesis of this subjective experience.
plans, and evaluating the consequences of the mental
In the ﬁnal stage (indicated by the blue parts in Fig. 1),
actions. The evaluation is driven by the feedback and it
the subjective or interoceptive representation, when of
is assumed that the frontal-striatal connectivity is the
suﬃcient distinctiveness, can function as a secondary
locus of the learning (cf. Koralek et al., 2012), with posireinforcer, as it is always paired with the feedback
tive feedback strengthening the connections between
reward. Therefore, the system is more likely to want to
the (frontal) goal representation and the striatal response
remain in that interoceptive state. Losing that sensation
plan.
would lead to activating the goal representation to return
In the second stage (indicated by the orange parts in
to that state. In this way, the desired interoceptive state
Fig. 1), trainees may have found a strategy that seems
forms a new homeostatic set point that aids in
to elicit a high rate of positive feedback signals. The
neurofeedback learning At present, it is speculated that
trainee then enters the consolidation phase. Two neural
this stage of interoceptive-homeostasis relies on the
processes are operational. The goal representation gets
interplay between the insula and dopaminergic midbrain
associated through reinforcement learning with the
areas (Geisler et al., 2007; Watabe-Uchida et al., 2012;
striatal representation, sharpening it in the process. This
Arsenault et al., 2014).
leads to changes to the neural architecture from the
Although the multi-stage theory as outlined here
striatum to cortex via the thalamus and can be
introduces the stages as operating sequentially, the
demonstrated by various functional (baseline EEG
sequentiality of stages comes from the order in which
recordings, EEG coherence) and structural (white/ gray
the processes come online and it is assumed that
matter density; see Ghaziri et al., 2013) brain measureinteraction occurs thereafter. For example, the (slower)
ments. In particular, it is assumed that the resulting strisynaptic changes within the thalamus (stage 2) will
atal representation inﬂuences the activation in the
aﬀect the magnitude of the target neural signal and thus
thalamic nuclei either through the striatal-thalamic, the
the probability of reward, which in turn inﬂuences the
striatal-pallidal-thalamic, or the striatal-nigral-thalamic
reward-modulated synaptic change at the striatum
pathways. Synaptic plasticity occurs in all these pathways
(stage 1). In addition, in those situations where a
and between the speciﬁc thalamic nuclei and the reticular
distinctive subjective representation exists (stage 3), the
thalamic nucleus. These synaptic modiﬁcations at the thaexplicit eﬀort of aiming to reach that subjective feeling
lamic level may lead to changes in baseline recordings
will also inﬂuence the striatal learning. Both interactive
across sessions. Using SMR-upregulation as an example,
routes lead to bootstrapping the neurofeedback learning
Sterman (1996) suggested that neurofeedback alters inhiand demonstrate that multiple processes can be
bitory mechanisms in the thalamus by increasing GABA

178

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

operational simultaneously. We turn to a computational
analysis of what happens during neurofeedback learning
after the multi-stage theory is compared to a number of
other views in the literature regarding how
neurofeedback works.

RELATED ACCOUNTS OF NEUROFEEDBACK
LEARNING
Beyond the general clinical view that neurofeedback
normalizes the brain, a more neurocognitive perspective
adds that it increases the neural eﬃciency or brings the
brain closer to self-organized criticality that is conducive
for maximal information transfer (e.g., Ros et al., 2014).
Current theorizing on the mechanisms underlying neurofeedback takes a high level view (Niv, 2013; Ros et al.,
2014) in that neurofeedback promotes synaptic modiﬁcations, leading to strengthening of neural circuitry. These
modiﬁcations alter the dynamics of brain networks (Ros
et al., 2013; Kluetsch et al., 2014) such as the default
mode network which is then assumed to be associated
with changes in cognitive performance and therapeutic
beneﬁt. However, these explanations do not address the
detailed neural mechanism underlying neurofeedback
learning, but there are some notable exceptions that largely overlap with the aforementioned theoretical view.
In a review paper, Birbaumer et al. (2013) largely
agree with the ﬁrst two stages described above, but disagree in two details. Consistent with the multi-stage theory, their view is that a response plan that produces the
desired brain state is learned in the same way as other
skills are learned and that there is an initial stage of
trial-and-error followed by consolidation of the appropriate
response plan. Whereas there is also agreement that
reinforcement learning underlies neurofeedback learning,
they equate the response plan with the strategy or goal
representation and in eﬀect do not distinguish between
the frontal and striatal representations. Separating these
representations allows for a single goal representation
to exist, while a striatal response plan is created via
reward-based learning. When such a striatal response
plan fails to increase reward frequency, the frontal representation will be purged and a new representation is activated. The two representations form a hierarchy with a
slower time-course at the frontal compared to the striatal
level.
Another point of diﬀerence is that although Birbaumer
et al. (2013) highlight the importance of motivational signals to stabilize the desired response plan through primary and secondary reinforcers, subjective experience
is not seen as a potential secondary reinforcer. In fact,
Birbaumer et al. (2013) view neurofeedback learning as
an implicit learning process that does not require consciousness (see also Chang et al., 2014). This, however,
is inconsistent with the methods in animal studies of making the animals hungry or thirsty before training and the
observation that humans are actively trying to ﬁnd a suitable strategy. The learning seems explicit and goaldriven. They acknowledge that unsuccessful studies
might have failed due to the lack of putting the subject
in a state of needing the reward signal (food or juice).

Finally, their view that the ‘‘response plan is modiﬁed
based on the diﬀerence between the anticipated eﬀect
and the actual eﬀect” (p. 297), does hint at a mental representation of the anticipated eﬀect (i.e., an internal
model), but they did not explicate what that representation
is. Instead of assuming only implicit or explicit learning
processes, the multi-stage theory allows for both components. The results of activation in the anterior insula
(Emmert et al., 2016) and its role in interoception
(Craig, 2002) could suggest a subjective mental representation based on proxies of bodily sensations. This representation could emerge during stage 2 and consolidated
in stage 3 and have an inﬂuence on striatal learning when
it functions as a secondary reinforcer.
A computational approach was adopted by
Legenstein and colleagues (Legenstein et al., 2010; see
also Legenstein et al., 2008 for work at the single neuron
level). They focused on a study by Jarosiewicz et al.
(2008) in which monkeys were trained to control a cursor
in a 3D virtual reality environment by modifying the activity
in the motor cortex. Legenstein et al.’s computational
model did not include a division between cortical and striatal areas, but consisted of two functional pools of neurons, where neurons in the ﬁrst pool send input to
neurons in the second pool. Legenstein et al. did not commit to a neural substrate and allowed for the possibility
that the reward-based learning could operate in extracortical and non-motor cortical areas, or even in the motor
cortex itself. The multi-stage theory advanced here
makes the stronger assumption that the learning mechanism is more likely to operate in the cortico-striatal projections. Activation of the simulated neurons was then used
to control the cursor movement. The global feedback signal that was provided for adjusting the synaptic connectivity was calculated from the angular match between the
actual and desired cursor direction. Although Legenstein
et al. addressed a neurofeedback protocol, their focus
was on the learning rule that underlies the synaptic plasticity between the two neuronal pools. Critically, they
showed that a reward-modulated Hebbian learning rule
can solve the credit-assignment problem inherent in the
task by making synaptic weight changes contingent on
the correlation between deviations in the reward signal
and in the postsynaptic potential compared to the longer
term average of the signal and potential. Adopting
Legenstein et al.’s (2008) ﬁndings, the multi-stage theory
assumes that the reward-modulated Hebbian learning
rule operates at the level of the striatal medium spiny neurons, thus providing a physiologically plausible solution to
the credit-assignment problem – ﬁnding which neurons
out of many simultaneously active ones are responsible
for the probabilistic reward signal – present during
stage-1 neurofeedback learning.
Ros et al. (2014) agrees with Legenstein et al.’s
(2010) view that synaptic plasticity is governed by a
reward-modulated Hebbian learning rule. They further
suggest that the neurofeedback system essentially augments the sensory repertoire, allowing the brain to
‘‘sense” the neuroelectrical patterns and thus make them
amenable to control in a homeostatic manner. In addition,
they argue that feedback signals need to be presented
above the threshold for awareness in order to be eﬀective.

179

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

Although they do not provide explicit mechanisms by
which neurofeedback operates, they use dynamical systems theory to argue that neurofeedback functions to
bring a disordered brain into a regime where there is maximal information transfer, which in turn explains the beneﬁts on cognitive and creative abilities of neurofeedback
training (see for reviews Gruzelier, 2014a,b).
In the following section, a computational model is
presented that implements the ﬁrst stage of the multistage theory of neurofeedback learning. The basic
components for demonstrating neurofeedback learning
are (1) stochastic activation of striatal neurons, with the
activation probability contingent on the changing frontostriatal synaptic weights that in turn (2) inﬂuence the
thalamic input to a cortical pool of neurons that produce
an EEG frequency, that (3) is analyzed in real-time to
provide feedback. Although the model focuses on stage
1 of the theory outlined in Fig. 1, the current
computational implementation does not feature (1) the
precise reward-modulated Hebbian learning rule (only
an abstraction of it), (2) detailed modeling of the basal
ganglia and thalamus, (3) synaptic modiﬁcations at the
thalamic level (stage 2), and (4) the emergence of
subjective experience as a secondary reinforcer (stage
3). All these aspects augment the core part of the
theory and their direct implementations are left for the
future.

THE TASK
The task that will be used here comes from a paper by
Zoefel and colleagues (2011). They were interested in
investigating the eﬀect of training the peak alpha frequency (PAF) as deﬁned by the peak amplitude in the
8–12 Hz range. To increase the PAF, the averaged upper
alpha frequency (UAF) band over P3, Pz, P4, O1, and O2
was rewarded, where UAF = [PAF, PAF + 2 Hz]. Participants were trained over ﬁve sessions, each session consisting of seven 5-min blocks. The ﬁrst and last blocks
were measurement-only blocks during which the participants sat quietly. The ﬁrst block was used to estimate
the individual PAF for that day. The following ﬁve blocks
were training blocks during which participants had to
increase the spectral power in the UAF range. To accomplish this, participants were provided with visual feedback
regarding whether the UAF value of the preceding second
was higher (red colour) or lower (blue colour) than the
average UAF measured in the baseline block, with colour
saturation indicating the UA amplitude. PAF has been
found to be associated with attention (Klimesch et al.,
1998), short-term memory (Nan et al., 2012), working
memory capacity (Moran et al., 2010), problem solving
(Haarmann et al., 2012), and mind wandering (Ros
et al., 2013) among others. In general, higher PAF is
associated with better cognitive performance (Klimesch,
1999; Hanslmayr et al., 2005). As the alpha rhythm amplitude ﬂuctuates (Palva and Palva, 2007; Omata et al.,
2013), the EEG measurements are essentially samples
from a distribution of amplitudes. This distribution can
be regarded as the within-subject variability of the alpha
rhythm, which can be compared across sessions.

SIMULATION STUDY 1: A SPIKING NEURON
MODEL OF UPPER ALPHA UPREGULATION
Here, a computational model is presented that mimics the
results of Zoefel et al. (2011). The model consists of an
EEG-generator and a feedback-based learning mechanism that based on the feedback it receives adjusts the
neural conﬁguration through which the EEG-generator is
more likely to produce the target frequency.
There are many computational models in the literature
that address how brain rhythms are generated (see for a
review, Van Drongelen, 2013). For the purposes of
demonstrating a proof of concept, the details are not too
important, other than that the model should be able to produce a useful proxy for the EEG signal. The choice for a
spiking neuron EEG generator over a mean-ﬁeld model
is that it demonstrates the utility of models at the neurophysiological level, which is then inherited by mean-ﬁeld
abstractions. It also implies that the current EEG generator could be replaced by models with increasing neurophysiological realism and detail, allowing future
investigations to consider for instance the interactions
between neurofeedback and neuroactive drugs. The simplest EEG generator chosen for this purpose is the model
by Izhikevich (2003) and was adopted without any
changes to the code. The reader is referred to
Izhikevich (2003) for further details. By using a simple
EEG generator, the model’s scope and focus is on the
striatal learning process instead of on the mechanisms
underlying alpha oscillations or alpha/theta training protocols. The model as presented by Izhikevich (2003) happens to produce only a clear oscillation in the alpha
frequency band without the need for an explicit implementation of the thalamus and its reticular nucleus. When
those components are implemented, the model produces
a more realistic frequency spectrum, including theta
rhythms (Izhikevich and Edelman, 2008). Such a model
will be explored in future research eﬀorts.

METHODS
The computational model addresses stage 1 in the multistage theory and its structure is shown in Fig. 2. A single
frontal representation is continuously active during a
simulation run and represents the goal. It is connected
via modiﬁable weights to the striatal part. The
conﬁguration of active striatal units forms the response
plan. The task that the model addresses is to ﬁnd the
distribution of active striatal units that maximizes the
frequency of reward feedback. This is accomplished by
changing the synaptic strengths of the fronto-striatal
connections. The output of the response plan is the
activation (or inhibition) of the thalamus and thalamic
reticular nucleus, which in turn inﬂuence the frequency
spectrum at the cortical level. To simplify the model as
much as possible, the output of the correct response
plan, here a single target unit, is used to activate the
EEG generator, in essence assuming that the thalamus
is only relaying the neural activation. Only the frontostriatal connections undergo synaptic change in this
simulation. All other connections, including those of the
EEG generator, are ﬁxed throughout a simulation run.

180

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

Fig. 2. Architecture of the computational model of stage 1 learning: the striatal-exploration stage.
The frontal goal representation is continuously activated during the simulation run and inﬂuences
via the modiﬁable fronto-striatal projections the activity the striatal units. The striatum consists of
1000 binary units that are updated every ms. Whereas only one target unit is connected to the
thalamus (for simplicity) at any one time approximately 10 MSN units are active. The model needs
to identify and strengthen the connection to the target unit. The thalamus sends noisy input to the
EEG generator with a higher input when the target MSN unit is active. The EEG generator is
identical to the model by Izhikevich (2003). The feedback is based on the spectral analysis over a
1024 ms window of EEG and updated every 100 ms. Only the red fronto-striatal connections are
modiﬁed. The blue connections remain ﬁxed for this simulation, although are modiﬁed during the
thalamic-consolidation stage.

The EEG generator
The EEG generator consists of 800 excitatory neurons
and 200 inhibitory spiking neurons that are fully
interconnected and receive noisy thalamic input
(Gaussian noise with mean = 5 or 2 for excitatory and
inhibitory neurons, respectively with sd = 1). The
neurons obey the following dynamics:
v0 ¼ 0:04v2 þ 5v þ 140  u þ I
u0 ¼ aðbv  uÞ
if v  30 mV; then fv ¼ c and u ¼ u þ dg

I stands for input, which comes from the thalamus and
from all other excitatory and inhibitory neurons. V
represents the membrane potential and u the membrane
recovery variable. After v reaches 30 mV, v and u are
reset to values c and u + d, respectively and activation
is propagated over the synaptic connections The two
pools of neurons diﬀer from each other in the type of
spiking behavior, which is governed by the parameters,

a, b, c, and d. For the excitatory
neurons: a = 0.02, b = 0.2, c = -65
+ 15 * r2e, d = 8 – 6 * r2e. For the
inhibitory
neurons:
a = 0.02 +
0.08 * ri, b = 0.25 – 0.05*ri, c = 65,
d = 2. At the beginning of each
simulation, re and ri are drawn from a
uniform distribution between 0 and 1,
for each neuron. This produces
parameter ranges of a, b, c, and d of
{0.02, 0.2, [65, 50], [2, 8]} for
excitatory and {[0.02, 0.1], [0.20,
0.25], 65, 2} for inhibitory neurons.
As shown by Izhikevich (2003) this
scheme produces a pool of excitatory
neurons that consists predominantly
of regular spiking neurons and a pool
of low-threshold and fast spiking inhibitory neurons. Fig. 3 shows traces
of membrane potentials for four neurons over a 2000 ms time interval.
The top two and bottom two traces
represent excitatory and inhibitory
neurons, respectively. As can be
seen, the parameter values greatly
aﬀect the neural dynamics. To obtain
an EEG signal, the sum of the membrane potentials of all excitatory neurons, Rve, was low-pass ﬁltered
using:
EEG(t) = 0.9 * EEG(t  1)
+ 0.1 * Rve(t).
Striatal learning

The
feedback-based
learning
mechanism is assumed to be
located in the striatum. The model
simpliﬁes the striatal part by
assuming 1000 binary medium spiny
neuron (MSN) units that have a
probability p < 1 of being active (i.e.,
set to 1). These units receive input from a frontal goal
representation (set equal to 1) which is multiplied by the
modiﬁable synaptic weight. For simplicity, no intrastriatal
connectivity is used here, other than the normalisation
of activation as a proxy for the high level of inhibitory
connectivity. Only one of those units is able to push the
EEG-generator to produce a higher PAF by disinhibiting
the thalamus to produce a higher mean value. Although
it is anticipated that the appropriate striatal response
plan consists of more than one neuron, the choice for
one unit here is to demonstrate the nontriviality of
ﬁnding the one target unit among 999 other units that
can be active simultaneously. Recent computational
work has shown that increasing the mean of the noisy
thalamic input increases the actual peak frequency
(Cohen, 2014). This forms a network version of the
input-frequency curve for single neurons. To speed up
the simulations, the target unit increases the mean thalamic input to the cortex by 1. At ﬁrst, the normalized probability is 1/100 for every unit (i.e., the expected number of
active units at any one time is 10), but with positive feed-

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

Fig. 3. Example of simulated traces of membrane potentials of four neurons of the EEG generator.
The traces were recorded for the ﬁrst 2000 ms of the EEG generator with all 1000 neurons. All
other neurons had their parameter values initialized using the random function. The neurons in
these panels were ﬁxed to the boundary values. (A) Trace of an excitatory neuron initialized with
re = 0. (B) Trace of an excitatory neuron initialized with re = 1. (C) Trace of an inhibitory neuron
initialized with re = 0. (D) Trace of an inhibitory neuron initialized with ri = 1.

back, the probability of the active units increases. Thus,
over the course of a successful neurofeedback session,
the likelihood of the target unit becoming active increases,
whereas the likelihood of the other units decreases. This
is not a trivial learning task, as the units are updated every
millisecond, whereas the feedback about the UAF in the
last 1024 samples is given every 100 ms (see below).
This creates a credit assignment problem – identifying
which MSN unit among many competing ones to
strengthen based on the feedback that is delayed and
nonspeciﬁc – that is solved here by matching the activation probability of the units with the thalamic activation.
This solution guarantees that the model ﬁnds the correct
target unit, although the time to ﬁnd it varies greatly
across simulations. Recent work by Legenstein et al.
(2010) shows how the credit assignment problem can
be solved in a physiological plausible way by making
fronto-striatal synaptic modiﬁcation contingent on the
covariance between the change in postsynaptic activity
and the change in reward signal.
The methods used for the EEG analysis are the same
as used by Zoefel et al. (2011). In short, the sampling frequency is 1 kHz and a moving window consisting of 1024
samples is updated every 100 ms. The Hammingwindowed EEG is subjected to fast Fourier transform from
which the average amplitude in the UAF band is
extracted. This measured UAF is then compared to the
mean UAF of the baseline block and information is send
to the feedback-based learning mechanism.
The learning mechanism updates the activation
probabilities of the MSN units by increasing or

181

decreasing them when feedback is
presented or absent, respectively.
When positive feedback is given,
the fronto-striatal weights to all the
MSN units are increased based on
the number of iterations each unit
was active during the preceding
1024
iterations
(min = 0,
max = 1024). When feedback is
absent, the weights are decreased
based on the mean activation of
the units in the preceding 1024
iterations.
The
weights
are
normalized and multiplied by 10 to
obtain activation probabilities for
the next 100 iterations after which
the next feedback signal is given.
The training sequence for the
model consisted of 5-min worth of
baseline recording, which is used
to estimate the PAF. This is
followed by one minute worth of
training and then 5-min worth of
post-training
baseline
measurement. Several runs were
conducted to verify reliability in
performance.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 4A presents representative
windows of simulated EEG before
and after the neurofeedback training. It can be seen that
the training led to more alpha rhythm. The spectral
density plots in Fig. 4B conﬁrm that the training did
increase PAF. In other words, the neurofeedback
training was successful.
The model shows the ability to learn to enhance the
alpha frequency, but what exactly happens in the model
as a consequence of the learning? One way to address
this question is by comparing what happens to the
distribution of UAF values before and after training.
Fig. 5A shows that training causes the distribution to
increase in variance while retaining the lower limit. In
other words, the stage 1 learning model as implemented
here leads to higher UAF values than expected with the
model without the target MSN unit. The distribution after
neurofeedback training is therefore a weighted
combination of two parent distributions, D(UAF|P
(target_MSN) = 0), which is the same as D(UAF|before), and
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1), with P(target_MSN) as the
weighting parameter.
Fig. 5B presents an example of an empirical case
study of a person trained on alpha over Pz for
10 months. The sampling frequency was 256 Hz, using
a ﬁlter-based approach. Further technical details are
unavailable. The empirical data ﬁles were obtained after
the local ethics committee approved analyzing this
dataset as secondary data which was done after the
simulation results were known. The resemblance
between the two ﬁgure panels is striking.

182

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

The
conceptualisation
of
neurofeedback training changing
the distribution of values of the
target frequency suggests that the
placement of the threshold is
critical. Set too high, the model will
decrease all weights and decrease
of the target frequency will occur.
Set too low and the model will not
learn at all as it increases the
weight for all MSN units, which are
then subsequently normalized. In
Fig. 5, the vertical line represents
the level which optimally separates
the two distributions. In order to
systematically investigate the eﬀect
of threshold setting on the learning,
simulations are needed that run the
neurofeedback training at each
threshold setting. We now turn to
such a simulation study.

SIMULATION STUDY 2: EEG
DISTRIBUTION SAMPLING
Fig. 4. Results of simulation study 1. The top panels show representative EEG samples before
and after simulated neurofeedback training. The bottom panel shows the spectral density plots for
before and after simulated neurofeedback training of the upper alpha band.

Fig. 5. Distributions of upper alpha (UAF) values before (blue) and after (red) neurofeedback
training. (A) Simulated results. (B) Empirical case study of a person trained on alpha upregulation
at Pz for 10 months. Note that in both panels, the distributions share the minimum values and that
the post-training distribution is stretched to encompass higher values. The vertical black line
optimally separates the two distributions.

In the model, even though the desired state exists in
the repertoire of the simulated participant before
training, its probability of occurring is very low and the
probability of it remaining active long enough to
inﬂuence neural dynamics is negligible. The model
equates the neurofeedback learning to a search task in
which a particular neural state is searched for that
enhances the likelihood of a positive reward. When the
target MSN unit is active, the minimum UAF value
remains the same and therefore min(D(UAF|P(target_MSN))
will be constant for any value of P(target_MSN),
resulting in a stretching of the distribution. Only when
the striatal representation produces a higher mean value
for a target frequency will the entire distribution shift,
which could happen in the thalamic-consolidation stage
(stage 2, not modelled here).

The minimalist spiking neuron model
showed that a computation-theoretic
approach to neurofeedback can
predict and capture real data on
distributions. Whether other data
patterns can be accounted for is an
important
question
for
future
studies. However, the aim of the
current modelling eﬀorts is to
understand what happens during
stage 1, the lowest level of the
learning process, i.e., how does the
system ﬁnd the right striatal
representation? To address this
question, an abstraction of the
previous model is used based on
the results that the model changes
the distribution of UAF values. This
allows for varying the threshold for
every simulation run. The learning
trajectories are then examined at
each threshold level.

METHOD
Two parent distributions, D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0) and
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1), consisting of 100,000 UAF values
each, were generated with the previous model (see
Fig. 6C). The current model consisted of 1,000 binary
MSN units receiving an activation of 1 multiplied by the
normalized synaptic weight to each MSN unit. This
value functioned as the probability of the unit being
active (i.e., output activation = 1). The initial synaptic
weight was 1, making the initial activation probability,
including the target unit, equal to 0.001. On every
iteration, 10 units were active. When the target unit
was part of the 10 active units, a UAF value from

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

183

that the model is learning to increase
the probabilities, but that there are
two limits. First, there are asymptotic
levels that depend on the threshold
setting. The closer the threshold
setting is to the optimal setting
(T = 78), the faster is the learning
(green trajectory in Fig. 6A) and the
higher the asymptotic value (on the
vertical green line in Fig. 6B). Fig. 6B
indicates that with a high threshold
setting the asymptotic level drops.
Fig. 6D shows the percentage of
trials (out of 100) in which the model
learns, i.e., the target MSN unit
increases in synaptic weight. Thus,
the second limit is that when the
threshold is set higher than the
optimal level, the model increasingly
does not learn. When the threshold
is set too high, negative weight
changes
dominate,
leading
to
unlearning of all connections. Due to
the probabilistic nature of the
sampling, a dominating negative
Fig. 6. Results of simulation study 2. (A) Trajectory of the averaged activation probability of the
target MSN unit over 10,000 iterations for all simulated threshold levels. The blue trajectory
weight change can only occur at
corresponds to a threshold level that is the mean of the baseline distribution. The green trajectory
thresholds higher than the mean of
is associated with the optimal threshold setting. (B) The averaged activation probability of the
the initial distribution, i.e., T > 64.98.
target MSN unit at time = 10,000 iterations. Note the sharp rise and fall below and above the
This simulation shows that the
threshold corresponding to the mean of the baseline distribution and the optimal threshold,
dominance occurs at thresholds
respectively. (C) Relative frequency distributions used in the simulation study. Both the baseline
(blue) and target (red) distributions consist of 100,000 samples simulated using the model from
higher than the optimal setting. Due
simulation study 1. Also shown are the mean of the baseline distribution (blue vertical line) and the
to the balance of learning and
optimal threshold setting (green vertical line). (D) The percentage of simulation runs (100 runs in
unlearning,
the
number
of
total per threshold level) that learned. Note the sharp drop in learners when the threshold is set
participating MSN units varies. The
higher than the optimal threshold (green vertical line). (For interpretation of the references to
colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
result is a small collection of MSN
units (out of 1000, including the
target MSN unit) that form a stable
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1) was selected, otherwise a UAF
response plan for the protocol. This resonates with
value from D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0) was selected. This
Birbaumer et al. (2013) assertion that learning sharpens
value was compared against the threshold, T, for that
the response plan.
simulation. If the value was larger than T, the weights to
There is a critical range of threshold settings that
all (10) active MSN units was increased by 0.1,
supports learning and within this range there is a narrow
otherwise their weights were decreased by 0.1. For the
temporal window in which most of the learning takes
next iteration, the weights were normalized (i.e., divided
place. What happens within these critical ranges? To
by the sum of weights) in order to obtain a new set of
address this question, the responses were classiﬁed as
activation probabilities.
hits, misses, correct rejections, and false alarms and
Each simulation ran for 10,000 iterations. There were
averaged for every 100 iterations, providing a time
100 simulation trials for each of 137 threshold levels. The
series of 100 epochs.
threshold levels were run from the minimum and
Fig. 7A shows the evolution of the averaged UAF
maximum of D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0), which were 15 and
values in each epoch for diﬀerent threshold levels: the
151, respectively. The mean of D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0)
learning curves. There is a clear separation between the
was 64.98 (blue vertical line in Fig. 6C) and of
lowest and highest values. Fig. 7B, C show the
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1) was 91.00. The threshold setting
distributions of UAF values across thresholds for the
that optimally separates the two distributions is T = 78
ﬁrst and ﬁnal epochs, respectively. As expected, the
(green vertical line in Fig. 6C).
level of the UAF values at the beginning centre on the
mean of the initial distribution, D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 7C shows the sharp divide between simulations in
which learning takes place and those in which learning
The results are shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6A, B show the
is absent. The sudden change in the UAF values over
activation probability of the target MSN unit for diﬀerent
epochs (see Fig. 7A) suggests that reaching the right
levels of T over 100,000 iterations or for
state leads to a self-promoting cycle akin to an attractor
time = 100,000, respectively. Fig. 6A, B demonstrate

184

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

MSN unit. Only when this happens,
the attractor dynamics will quickly
make the activation probability
maximal. A threshold set lower than
the median of D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0)
or higher than the median of
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1) will lead to
increasing the likelihood of activating
non-targets and decreasing the
likelihood of activating the target
MSN unit, respectively.
To conclude, this simulation
demonstrates that learning in this
abstracted version of neurofeedback
training is due to unlearning of
unsuitable representations followed
by enhancing the likelihood of the
suitable one.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
This paper addressed the neural
mechanisms involved in learning to
change the EEG spectral proﬁle at a
Fig. 7. Results on the UAF values sampled in simulation study 2. (A) Learning curves showing the
given electrode site. The multi-stage
average UAF value in each of 100 epochs (1 epoch = 100 iterations) for every threshold setting.
theory of neurofeedback learning
(B) Distributions of UAF values in the ﬁrst epoch across threshold levels. As no learning has taken
place, the distribution is identical tot he baseline distribution. (C) Distributions of UAF values in the
consists of three stages, striatalﬁnal epoch across threshold levels. Learning has taken place for some threshold levels. Note that
exploration, thalamic-consolidation,
within the narrow range, the distribution of samples is removed from the baseline distribution. The
and interoceptive-homeostasis (or
white diagonal line in 7B and C indicates when the threshold level equals the UAF value.
insular-homeostasis).
The
early
period of learning is dominated by
frontal
brain
areas
generating
diﬀerent
representations
and
state. This can be understood as follows. When the target
maintaining those that produce a
MSN unit is active, a UAF value is sampled from
positive feedback signal. The middle period is
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1), which is more likely to lead to a
characterized by activating the winning frontal
positive feedback than a value sampled from D(UAF|P
representation and modifying the synaptic connections
(target_MSN) = 0). The reward signal leads to an increase
to and within the thalamus. The ﬁnal phase involves
in probability of the target MSN unit to be active again
awareness of the bodily state associated with the target
on the next iteration, which leads again to sampling
brain state and use the subjective experiential
from D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1), and so on. This attractor
representation as secondary reinforcer for closing the
dynamics explains the suddenness of the change in
homeostatic loop.
averaged UAF values.
Although the theory involves several stages, these
The initial probability of activating the target MSN unit
stages are not ordered in terms of one stage ﬁnishing
is very low, but learning, or more precisely unlearning, is
before the next one starts, instead the stages are
taking place prior to reaching the target attractor state.
ordered in sequence of coming online during the overall
Fig. 8A shows the diﬀerence in hits and false alarms as
neurofeedback learning process. This means that after
a function of epoch and threshold. The values
stage 2 or 3 has got some momentum they alter the
are maximal in the narrow range of thresholds
neural signal and thus the distribution of reward signals,
between the medians of D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 0) and
which in turn impacts on the stage 1 fronto-striatal
D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1). The maximum occurs earlier for
learning. In order to assess the interactivity of these
higher thresholds within this range. Fig. 8B shows that
stages, measurements at multiple timescales are
the probability of the target MSN unit being active in
needed. In addition to interactivity, the stages decrease
each epoch is close to binary, again indicating the
in essentiality to neurofeedback learning. Whereas
attractor behavior. To understand what drives this
reward-based learning is the core process in stage 1,
pattern, the probability of correctly rejecting a UAF value
neurofeedback learning does not need thalamic-level of
as coming from D(UAF|P(target_MSN) = 1) (Fig. 8C) is
synaptic modiﬁcations. Within-session improvements
compared against the hit rate (Fig. 8D). The attractor
may simply reﬂect the results of stage 1 learning.
state is not entered because of increasing the weights
Thalamic synaptic changes may be reﬂected in
to the target MSN unit, but by decreasing the weights to
improvements over sessions and in particular in the
non-target units. The normalisation that follows
baseline blocks across sessions. Finally, interoceptive
increases the relative probability of activating the target

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

185

suﬃcient to be able to say that there
exists a subjective representation.
Such a representation can become a
secondary reinforcer during the neurofeedback training sessions and
can be used as the only reinforcer
when the trainee is not connected to
the EEG equipment. As a result, further training using only subjective representations becomes very much like
meditation practices.
The aim of this paper was twofold: introducing the multi-stage
theory of neurofeedback learning
and
demonstrating
how
a
methodology,
computational
modelling, in neuroscience can
contribute
to
neurofeedback
research. The computational model
was not targeted to implement the
entire theory, but instead focused on
the very ﬁrst stage of neurofeedback
learning. It was shown that an oﬀthe-shelf spiking neuron model of
alpha generation augmented with a
striatal learning component was able
to demonstrate the unfolding of the
striatal-exploration
phase.
From
analyses
of
an
abstracted
version
Fig. 8. Signal-detection theoretic analyses of simulation study 2. (A) Diﬀerence between hit rate
and false alarm rate as a function of epoch and threshold setting. The results show a narrow range
based on distributions of UAF values
of threshold levels and a temporal window in which the samples are correctly identiﬁed as coming
it was found that the neurofeedback
from the target distribution. (B) Actual probability of the target MSN being active as a function of
model learns initially by correctly
epoch and threshold setting. This ﬁgure demonstrates that the system is almost complete binary in
rejecting low UAF values as coming
activating the target MSN unit, which supports the attractor-style dynamics discussed in the text.
from the target state, which
(C) Probability of correctly rejecting samples as coming from the target distribution as a function of
epoch and threshold setting. This reveals that the transition observed in 8B requires levels of
increases the likelihood of the target
correct rejections between 0.4 and 0.8. (D) Probability of correctly accepting samples as coming
state, from which point the model
from the target distribution as a function of epoch and threshold setting. The ﬁgure shows that hit
continues to learn through correctly
rate is not driving the almost sudden transition observed in 8B.
accepting high UAF values as
coming from the target state. The
end result is that the model samples
awareness may not occur at all or when it occurs may not
from an asymptotic density function that is close to the
lead to noticeable improvements. However, evidence for
target distribution.
such a stage is reﬂected in the diﬀerential subjective
Although
the
simulations
are
necessarily
experiences associated with diﬀerent protocols (Edge
oversimpliﬁcations, a few limitations are worthy of
and Lancaster, 2004).
mention to be taken into account in future extensive
Related to topic of subjective experiences is the notion
analyses. First, the sampling of UAF values from the
that neurofeedback does not require consciousness at all
distribution is independent of the sampling history. This
(Birbaumer et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2014). Although the
means that the model does not capture the
multi-stage theory allows for explicit processes to inﬂuautocorrelation present in actual data. High levels of
ence learning, the striatal-exploration stage is unconautocorrelation
are
associated
with
decreased
scious to extent that the actual response plan may not
information content. Thus, if an analysis is needed to
be amenable to introspection. In such a situation, diﬀerent
address the system-level dynamics, the model needs to
trainees may provide diﬀerent answers to the question of
account for autocorrelation, either through sampling
what they did to increase reward frequency. Note that the
changes in UAF values from a parent distribution or by
assessment of subjective experience requires more than
using the type of model used in simulation study 1.
a question such as ‘‘What did you do as a strategy?”
Another limitation is the focus on a single ‘‘electrode
Instead, we (Davelaar et al., 2016) advocate that a time
site”, which assumes that neurofeedback using one
is spent interviewing the trainee to get a detailed narrative
electrode will not inﬂuence the spectral proﬁle observed
that is then subjected to a phenomenological analysis. On
at another electrode. Several empirical reports have
the other side, the interoceptive representation that
documented the nonspeciﬁcity of EEG neurofeedback,
emerges during stage 3 need not be verbalisable. For
with changes in power occurring in non-target
example, just being able to recognize the ‘‘gut feeling” is

186

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

frequencies and/or at non-target electrodes (e.g., Egner
et al., 2004; Haarmann et al., 2012; Ros et al., 2013)
and structural changes occurring in areas removed from
the EEG electrode sites (Ghaziri et al., 2013). These
observations support the argument for a network-level
instead of localisation approach to neurofeedback
(Gruzelier, 2014c) which is further strengthened by the
ﬁnding that neurofeedback reconﬁgures functional connectivity in brain networks (e.g., Haller et al., 2013; Ros
et al., 2013). The theory accommodates these eﬀects
through the provision of modiﬁcation of synaptic strengths
at the reticular thalamic nucleus that originate from the
basal ganglia (e.g., Gasca-Martinez et al., 2010) or prefrontal cortex (e.g., Zikopoulos and Barbas, 2006). Interregional oscillations may occur when two regions share
the same speciﬁc thalamic nucleus and/or the same reticular projection zone (for a computational account see
Victor et al., 2011).
A major utility of a model is that it can also be used to
test various proposed indices on which to base the
feedback or quantify learning. For example, Dempster
and Vernon (2009) trained participants to increase alpha
(8–12 Hz) over Pz. Feedback was analogue and based
on the alpha amplitude above the average baseline amplitude. They compared amplitude, percent time, and integrated alpha as indices of learning and found that the
amplitude measure was superior in showing learning
across sessions both with and without baseline correction. Discussion on the appropriate index has not converged and more extensive work is needed, but such an
endeavour is very time-consuming (10 weeks/participant
in Dempster and Vernon, 2009). Without a measure of
eﬀect size to calculate the number of participants needed
to obtain a reasonable level of statistical power, such a
study could easily suﬀer from underpowered designs. A
model could run the suggested designs and provide estimates of eﬀect size that can be used in planning the
studies.
The theory also makes testable predictions that could
further the ﬁeld. For example, it predicts that
dopaminergic signals are necessary for learning to
occur, which provides a pathway to increase or
decrease neurofeedback eﬃcacy or understand why
certain populations are non-trainable. It also predicts
that training on the same protocol can follow diﬀerent
learning pathways dependent on the dynamic status of
the cortico-striatal-thalamic circuitry and thus produce
diﬀerent patterns of synaptic change. Dry-testing
predictions through computational implementation
enhances the cost-eﬀectiveness of empirical studies and
can guide future development of research methodology
and data-analytics.
The work presented here paves the way for more
detailed computational eﬀorts. Two areas for further
developments are (1) using more neurophysiologically
realistic neural circuitries, and (2) applying the model to
test commonly used methods. Regarding the former,
directions for research include developing models with
laminar organisation that have explicit cortico-thalamic
and cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic loops, which can
produce multiple brain rhythms and incorporate synaptic

plasticity that are sensitive to neuromodulators involved
in reinforcement learning. Importantly, the theory is not
limited to EEG, but is in principle applicable to rt-fMRI or
rt-NIRS. Regarding the latter, various choices regarding
threshold setting, windowing, Fourier versus ﬁltering,
feedback type and feedback modality, (and more) can
be systematically investigated without running lengthy
and costly studies. The system can be subjected to
mathematical analysis to address optimisation in highdimensional search.

CONCLUSION
This paper presented a theoretical account of
mechanisms underlying neurofeedback learning and
analyzed a minimal model of the neural learning
dynamics underlying successful EEG neurofeedback.
The view is that models developed in the ﬁeld of
computational neuroscience can be applied to address
the thorny question in the ﬁeld of neurofeedback: ‘‘How
does neurofeedback work?”. Model analyses show that
neurofeedback can be likened to a search process that
ﬁrst rejects representations that produce low levels of
the desired EEG proﬁle, which increases the likelihood
of activating a representation that produces the desired
levels. The success of this minimal model provides the
necessary proof of concept that neurofeedback research
can be facilitated by incorporating computational
approaches developed in other disciplines to address
theoretical and practical questions. This paper
demonstrated that such an endeavour has merit.

DISCLOSURE POLICY
The author declares that there is no conﬂict of interest
regarding the publication of this paper.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Mervyn Etienne for providing the EEG data shown
in Fig. 5B and Henk Haarmann for detailed comments
and suggestions. This research did not receive any
speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial, or non-for-proﬁt sectors.

REFERENCES
Arsenault JT, Rima S, Stemmann H, Vanduﬀel W (2014) Role of the
primate ventral tegmental area in reinforcement and motivation.
Curr Biol 24:1347–1353.
Birbaumer N, Elbert T, Canavan A, Rockstroh B (1990) Slow
potentials of the cerebral cortex and behavior. Physiol Rev
70:1–41.
Birbaumer N, Ruiz S, Sitaram R (2013) Learned regulation of brain
metabolism. Trends Cogn Sci 17:295–302.
Budzynski TH, Budzynski HK, Evans JR, Abarbanel A (2009)
Introduction to quantitative EEG and neurofeedback. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Chang M, Iizuka H, Naruse Y, Ando H, Maeda T (2014) Unconscious
learning of auditory discrimination using mismatch negativity
(MMN) neurofeedback. Sci Rep 4:6729.
Ceunen E, Vlaeyen JWS, Van Diest I (2016) On the origin of
interoception. Front Psychol 7:743.
Cohen MX (2014) Fluctuations in oscillation frequency control spike
timing and coordinate neural networks. J Neurosci 34:8988–8998.

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188
Craig AD (2002) How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the
physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:655–666.
Davelaar EJ, Barnby JM, Almasi S, Eatough V (2016)
Neurophenomenology and neurofeedback: a pilot study. Front
Hum Neurosci Conference Abstract: SAN2016 Meeting.
Dempster T, Vernon D (2009) Identifying indices of learning for alpha
neurofeedback training. Appl Psychophys Biof 34:309–318.
Edge J, Lancaster L (2004) Phenomenological analysis of superior
musical performance facilitated by neurofeedback: enhancing
musical performance through neurofeedback: playing the tune of
life. Transpers Psychol Rev 8:23–35.
Egner T, Zech TF, Gruzelier JH (2004) The eﬀects of neurofeedback
training on the spectral topography of the electroencephalogram.
Clin Neurophysiol 115:2452–2460.
Emmert K, Kopel R, Sulzer J, Brühl AB, Berman BD, Linden DEJ,
Horovitz SG, Breimhorst M, Caria A, Frank S, Johnston S, Long Z,
Paret C, Robineau F, Veit R, Bartsch A, Beckmann CF, Van De
Ville D, Haller S (2016) Meta-analysis of real-time fMRI
neurofeedback studies using individual participant data: how is
brain regulation mediated? Neuroimage 124:806–812.
Evans JR, Abarbanel A (1999) Introduction to quantitative EEG and
neurofeedback. San Diego: Academic Press.
Gasca-Martinez D, Hernandez A, Sierra A, Valdiosera R, AnayaMartinez V, Floran B, Erlij D, Aceves J (2010) Dopamine inhibits
GABA transmission from the globus pallidus to the thalamic
reticular nucleus via presynaptic D4 receptors. Neuroscience
169:1672–1681.
Geisler S, Derst C, Veh RW, Zahm DS (2007) Glutamatergic
aﬀerents of the ventral tegmental area in the rat. J Neurosci
27:5730–5743.
Ghaziri J, Tucholka A, Larue V, Blanchette-Sylvestre M, Reyburn G,
Gilbert G, Lévesque J, Beauregard M (2013) Neurofeedback
training induces changes in white and gray matter. Clin EEG
Neurosci 44:265–272.
Gruzelier JH (2009) A theory of alpha/theta neurofeedback, creative
performance enhancement, long distance functional connectivity
and psychological integration. Cogn Process 10:S101–109.
Gruzelier JH (2014a) EEG-neurofeedback for optimising
performance. I: a review of cognitive and aﬀective outcome in
healthy participants. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 44:124–141.
Gruzelier JH (2014b) EEG-neurofeedback for optimising
performance. II: creativity, the performing arts and ecological
validity. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 44:142–158.
Gruzelier JH (2014c) EEG-neurofeedback for optimising
performance. III: a review of methodological and theoretical
considerations. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 44:159–182.
Gruzelier JH, Bamidis P, Babiloni F, de Ridder D (2014a) Applied
neuroscience: models, methods, theories, reviews. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 44:1–3.
Gruzelier JH, Bamidis P, Pagiani L, Reiner M, Ros T (2014b) Applied
neuroscience. Int J Psychophysiol 93:ix–xii.
Haarmann HJ, George T, Smaliy A, Dien J (2012) Remote associates
test and alpha brain waves. J Probl Solv 4:5.
Haller S, Kopel R, Jhooti P, Haas T, Scharnowski F, Lovblad K-O,
Scheﬄer K, Van de Ville D (2013) Dynamic reconﬁguration of
human brain functional networks through neurofeedback.
Neuroimage 81:243–252.
Hanslmayr S, Sauseng P, Doppelmayr M, Schabus M, Klimesch W
(2005) Increasing individual upper alpha power by neurofeedback
improves cognitive performance in human subjects. Appl
Psychophys Biof 30:1–10.
Hinterberger T, Veit R, Wilhelm B, Weiskopf N, Vatine J-J, Birbaumer
N (2005) Neuronal mechanisms underlying control of a braincomputer interface. Eur J Neurosci 21:3169–3181.
Hsieh LT, Ranganath C (2014) Frontal midline theta oscillations
during working memory maintenance and episodic encoding and
retrieval. Neuroimage 85:721–729.
Hughes SW, Crunelli V (2005) Thalamic mechanisms of EEG alpha
rhythms and their pathological implications. Neuroscientist
11:357–372.

187

Izhikevich EM (2003) Simple model of spiking neurons. IEEE T
Neural Networ 14:1569–1572.
Izhikevich EM, Edelman GM (2008) Large-scale model of mammalian
thalamocortical systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
105:3593–3598.
Jarosiewicz B, Chase SM, Fraser GW, Velliste M, Kass RE, Schwartz
AB (2008) Functional network reorganization during learning in a
brain-computer interface paradigm. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
105:19486–19491.
Johnston SJ, Boehm SG, Healy D, Goebel R, Linden DEJ (2010)
Neurofeedback: a promising tool for the self-regulation of emotion
networks. Neuroimage 49:1066–1072.
Klimesch W (1999) EEG alpha and theta oscillations reﬂect cognitive
and memory performance: a review and analysis. Brain Res Rev
29:169–195.
Klimesch W, Doppelmayr M, Russegger H, Pachinger T, Schwaiger J
(1998) Induced alpha band power changes in the human EEG
and attention. Neurosci Lett 244:73–76.
Kluetsch RC, Ros T, Théberge J, Frewen PA, Calhoun VD, Schmahl
C, Jetly R, Lanius RA (2014) Plastic modulation of PTSD restingstate networks and subjective wellbeing by EEG neurofeedback.
Acta Psychiat Scand 130:123–136.
Koralek AC, Jin X, Long JD, Costa RM, Carmena JM (2012)
Corticostriatal plasticity is necessary for learning intentional
neuroprosthetic skills. Nature 483:331–335.
Legenstein R, Chase SM, Schwartz AB, Maass W (2010) A rewardmodulated hebbian learning rule can explain experimentally
observed network reorganization in a brain control task. J
Neurosci 30:8400–8410.
Legenstein R, Pecevski D, Maass W (2008) A learning theory for
reward-modulated
spike-timing-dependent
plasticity
with
application to biofeedback. PLoS Comput Biol 4:e1000180.
Levesque J, Beauregard M, Mensour B (2006) Eﬀect of
neurofeedback training on the neural substrates of selective
attention in children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: A
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Neurosci Lett
394:216–221.
Moran RJ, Campo P, Maestu F, Reilly RB, Dolan RJ, Strange BA
(2010) Peak frequency in the theta and alpha bands correlates
with human working memory capacity. Front Hum Neurosci
11:200.
Nan W, Rodrigues JP, Ma J, Qu X, Wan F, Mak P, Mak PU, Vai MI,
Rosa A (2012) Individual alpha neurofeedback training eﬀect on
short term memory. Int J Psychophysiol 86:83–87.
Niv S (2013) Clinical eﬃcacy and potential mechanisms of
neurofeedback. Pers Ind Diﬀ 54:676–686.
Omata K, Hanakawa T, Morimoto M, Honda M (2013) Spontaneous
slow ﬂuctuation of EEG alpha rhythm reﬂects activity in deepbrain structures: a simultaneous EEG-fMRI study. PLoS One 8:
e66869.
Palva S, Palva JM (2007) New vistas for alpha-frequency band
oscillations. Trends Neurosci 30:150–158.
Ritter P, Moosmann M, Villringer A (2009) Rolandic alpha and beta
EEG rhythms’ strengths are inversely related to fMRI-BOLD
signal in primary somatosensory and motor cortex. Hum Brain
Mapp 30:1168–1187.
Ros T, Baars BJ, Lanius RA, Vuilleumier P (2014) Tuning
pathological brain oscillations with neurofeedback: a systems
neuroscience framework. Front Hum Neurosci 8:1008.
Ros T, Theberge J, Frewen PA, Kluetsch R, Densmore M, Calhoun
VD, Lanius RA (2013) Mind over chatter: plastic up-regulation of
the fMRI salience network directly after EEG neurofeedback.
Neuroimage 65:324–335.
Sterman MB (1996) Physiological origins and functional correlates of
EEG rhythmic activities: implications for self-regulation.
Biofeedback Self-Reg 21:3–33.
van Boxtel GJM, Gruzelier JH (2014) Neurofeedback. Biol Psychol
95:1–3.
Van Drongelen W (2013) Modeling neural activity. ISRN
Biomath:871472.

188

E. J. Davelaar / Neuroscience 378 (2018) 175–188

Victor JD, Drover JD, Conte MM, Schiﬀ ND (2011) Mean-ﬁeld
modeling of thalamocortical dynamics and a model-driven
approach to EEG analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108:15631–15638.
Watabe-Uchida M, Zhu L, Ogawa SK, Vamanrao A, Uchida N (2012)
Whole-brain mapping of direct inputs to midbrain dopamine
neurons. Neuron 74:858–873.

Zikopoulos B, Barbas H (2006) Prefrontal projections to the thalamic
reticular nucleus form a unique circuit for attentional mechanisms.
J Neurosci 26:7348–7361.
Zoefel B, Huster RJ, Hermann CS (2011) Neurofeedback training of
the upper alpha frequency band in EEG improves cognitive
performance. Neuroimage 54:1427–1431.

(Received 28 November 2016, Accepted 29 May 2017)
(Available online 9 June 2017)

